So far some of the features implemented are:

--------------------------------------------------
1. Generic mathematics

Common lisp comes out of the box lacking generic mathematics; i.e. one
cannot simply extend the +, -, /, *, sqrt, etc. functions.  I looked
for libraries which already did this, and found among them Antik.
However: Antik's structure was heavily biased (IMO) towards grids &
arrays.  So, I decided to just build the basic mathematical generic
functions which can sit atop the built-in CL functions as well as
anything that libraries like Antik provide.

This resulted in the development of a simple error propogation library
among other benefits for histogramming, data fitting, linear algebra
(no I did not re-implement this), etc.

--------------------------------------------------
2. Error propogation & Quantities

The error-propogation library provides err-num numerical objects which
automatically perform error propogation during a computation.  This
was done via specializing on the generic math functions as provided by
the generic math library.

The representation for err-num values is:

(+- x y ...)

to mean

x +- y +- ....

The structure is recursive so that each value (other than the first)
is the error in the preceding value.  The generic math library is
implemented in such a way that the propogation is done correctly at
all levels of error (precluding bugs that is).

As a similar physics-based numerical concept, I have implemented
physical quantities (values with dimensions like length, mass, etc.)
as well. Quantities are represented by a CLOS class, with conversions
from numbers, err-nums and keyword symbols (used to represent units)
into quantities.  Libraries like Antik have already implemented
quantities, but I chose to approach the problem from a different
direction by defining generic functions specializing on keyword
symbols, numerical values, and the quantity type in order to keep
everything on the functional side as opposed to the reader macro side
of things.

Utilities are provided for easy definition of new units & constants;
the base unit system is S.I.

Quantities and error propogation play nice together; as an example:

(* (+- 5 1.3) :meter)

would denote (5 +- 1.3) meters, and subsequent operations would have
error propogation included in the calculation.

--------------------------------------------------
3. Tables

Tables are 2 dimensional data storage abstractions (think of the awk
Unix utility).  A table is composed of a number of rows.  Each row is
composed of a number of fields.  Each row must have the same number
and kinds of fields; i.e. tables are rectangular.

Tables are required to provide at a minimum sequential reading
from/writing into, but a table when opened for reading is only
required to available for reading, and the same goes for tables opened
for writing, though some table types may specifically provide two-way
access.

(I intend to provide higher level table management functionality that
abstracts away this limitation by automatically managing the physical
table objects behind the scenes.)

For writing, one can modify the fields of a row and then commit the
row into the table.  As a convience, this can be done as a one-step
process using the table-push-fields macro which uses a let-like syntax
to denote the values of the table fields.

For reading, one can use either the table-reduce function or the
do-table macro.  do-table creates a loop body inside which the field
values for each row are already known; all you have to do is reference
a (marked) field variable name and it will be read into memory each
iteration of the loop.  table-reduce is used to implement do-table and
is useful for when one wants to programmatically select fields from
the table for instance.

(I am aware of the Data Table library
(https://github.com/AccelerationNet/data-table) already available;
however, using this along with HDF5 files seemed like a potentially
messy endeavor.  So I decided to implement tables as a higher-level
abstraction, of which the data-table type from the above library could
be an instance.)

So far I've implemented the following table types:

hdf-table: Provides access to HDF5 datasets.  The access is limited to
1-dimensional datasets with compound datatypes as the dataset datum
type.  Allows random read access.  Related is the read-only
hdf-table-chain object which chains together a list of files
containing the same type of HDF5 dataset as a single table, managing
files and reading data into memory as needed.  Using an
hdf-table-chain as opposed to the more general table-chain described
below has the advantage of knowing how many rows are in the total
table chain before one traverses them.

csv-table: Provides access to CSV (Comma Separated Values) files.
Convenient for interfacing with spreadsheet data.  Can be read or
written.

ntuple-table: Provides access to ntuple datasets as implemented by GSL
(uses GSLL).  Can be read or written, though the ntuple format does
not include any information on the type of data it stores, so you have
to keep track of it yourself.

plist-table: Creates a readable table object from a list of property
lists (known as plists in LISP terminology) where each plist is
interpreted to be a row.  Handy for small-scale in-memory computation;
I used it for debugging mainly.

table-chain: Chains together tables of any type for reading, provided
they have the same row structure.  Could be handy for implementing the
higher-level table management functionality.

reusable-table: Wraps a lower-level table for reading in such a way
that it can be repeatedly read in its entirety without need to re-open
the table.  The disadvantage is that it is a little clumsy to access
the internal table object directly; the advantage is that one can
easily complete multiple passes over the table.

--------------------------------------------------
4. Histograms

Histograms are currently provided in two types: Contiguous and Sparse.

Contiguous histograms store histogram bin values in-memory in a
recursive array of arrays of arrays ..., what I implement in the
tensor sublibrary.  This is inefficient in memory when there are many
empty bins, but is efficient in computing time for arithmetic
operations, integration, etc.

Sparse histograms are implemented using hash tables so that empty bin
values are not stored.  This is efficient in memory when the data is
sparse but inefficient for arithmetic operations--so much so that at
the moment I neglect to implement these functions.

The operations common to both histogram types are:

* Insertion: Inserting values into a histogram is done statefully for
the sole reason of efficiency.

* Mapping: One can map a function over the bins of a histogram,
returning a new histogram.

* Filtering: Filtering makes use of mapping to exclude bins from the
resulting histogram.  Useful for making cuts/selections on data
samples.

* Integration over any number of dimensions for subranges or the
entire dimension.

* Projection onto any selection of dimensions; this is just
integration over all the non-selected dimensions.

* Conversion between the two types of histograms (contiguous <-->
sparse).  This is useful for when you want to project a high
dimensional sparse histogram onto only a few dimensions, making it
better to have a contiguous histogram.

--------------------------------------------------
5. Fitting

Specifically, nonlinear least squares fitting as implemented by GSL.

The GSL library is supposed to implement the fitting without need for
an analytic Jacobian, but using GSLL I can't seem to figure out how to
use it/there is a bug in the interface or implementation, since every
time I call the appropriate function it fails with a memory fault
while inside a foreign function call.

However, the analytical Jacobian version works fine, so I just
implemented a higher-order function which creates the Jacobian
function given an input function.  This seems to remedy the situation
fine; I haven't seen any performance or accuracy issues so far in the
testing.

Fitting is done using lisp functions instead of special fit-able
function objects.  Some things about the function are inferred from
the other arguments, for example the number of fit parameters is
inferred from the initial parameter guesses you provide the fit
routine.

To integrate your data container with the fitting routine, you have to
specialize on a method which generates an alist mapping the
independent data values to the dependent ones, but that's all that's
required.

--------------------------------------------------
6. Lorentz vectors/boosts

I've implemented a simple lorentz vector and boosting library.

It's integrated into the generic math framework as well, so some of
the functions such as +, -, *, / will work.

Boosting is done by creating a boost matrix and then applying the
matrix to the lorentz vector; there are convenient functions written
to do this.  It seemed more efficient to create a single boost matrix
and then multiply many lorentz vectors instead of re-creating the
matrix every time you want to boost a single vector.

--------------------------------------------------
7. Plotting

Plotting is largely complete, though there are still a few things
which require direct gnuplot commands.

The structure of the gnuplot objects are mostly mimicked as CLOS
classes, and on top of these convenience functions and generic
functions are defined and specialized allowing one to plot LISP
functions, strings representing formulae, data in the form of alists,
histograms (1-D and 2-D; 2-D histograms are plotted with color as the
z-axis).

When using the full gnuplot object structure, the resulting code looks
much like a markup language for making plots; this is very useful for
quickly getting an idea of what is being plotted and can
simultaneously make use of programmatically generated plot structure.

--------------------------------------------------
Appendix: Miscellaneous libraries

In the process of creating the other functionality, I've had to create
several small utilities & libraries.

For example, there a number of x-utils libraries like list-utils,
string-utils, functional-utils, macro-utils, etc.  These provide small
functionality in the appropriate subdomains.

The memoization library provides a new function definition operator
defun-memoized which defines a memoized function.  These functions
remember previous return values so that lengthy computations/tree-like
recursive patterns can be efficiently computed.  It is implemented via
hash tables.

The tensor library generalizes the idea of mapping to sequences of
arbitrary structural depth, e.g. lists of lists, or arrays of lists of
arrays of ....  It also provides several useful functions which can be
defined on top of the tensor-map function, such as tensor-+, tensor--,
and other arithmetic operations as well as tensor contraction, which
turned out to be a fairly messy operation (you're welcome).

The typespec library (and hdf-typespec) provides typed data
descriptions and conversions that can be used with CFFI.  Raw CFFI
does a good job for basic tasks, but I found it difficult to copy
arbitrarily deep structures automatically, so I implemented this
functionality as part of typespec.  hdf-typespec provides the ability
to convert between HDF5 data types and CFFI types via typespecs.  This
allows the generation of cstruct types after reading the HDF5 data
type from an HDF file.

Lastly there are the foreign function interfaces I've written to
either provide interfaces with foreign libraries or extend/repair the
ones provided by other libraries I depend on, such as GSLL.
