+ Make note in the wiki that res forms are no longer supported in a
  logical field.  Show how equivalent functionality is provided by
  creating a logical table and loading res forms as init expressions.

+ Remove support for res forms in logical fields in makeres-table.
  This is unnecessary and cumbersome to implement accurately.

- After changing from depsort to topological sort, I've found that the
  project in tabletrans-test.lisp is not sorted correctly.
  Investigate and solve this bug.

  Added invert-depmap to solve this.

+ Create graphical project viewer add-on for Emacs.  The project
  viewer would include an ID search/auto-complete function, as well as
  copying IDs to the kill ring, etc.

  At the moment, this is not really necessary since with SLIME,
  evaluating (target-ids) into the REPL and then a regex I-search
  backwards lets you find matching target IDs very quickly.

- Add macro unsetdeps and function unsetdepsfn which unset any
  dependencies of a target.  This is needed when attempting load a
  project but recalculate some results at the same time.

  The sequence of operations would be

  1. (load-project)
  2. Change definitions or unset some results
  3. Call (unsetdeps id) for each ID that has been unset
  4. (makeres)

+ Add target nicknames functionality.  Transformation doesn't seem
  adequate since the nicknames should be useful outside of the
  transformation pipeline, so most likely needs to be a modification
  to the makeres system.

- Add a checkres check with error handling to makeres, so that
  execution is not attempted if the target table is invalid.

+ Add parallel execution of targets to makeres/compres.  Still hashing
  out the details.  Make sure to allow rules, such as only one table
  pass operation at a time.  When used with makeres-cpp, the user
  could allow 2 C++ table passes at a time for example since C++ can
  be at least twice as fast as Lisp, but this option needs to be
  available.

  This needs to be added directly to the makeres and/or compres
  functions, since table transformations are not good at handling
  runtime constraints, which this would need to use in order to be
  most efficient.  A bad alternative I considered briefly was to use a
  transformation that drastically altered the target table so that
  there is a master target which dispatches parallel jobs, and all
  results are fed from the master target into the result targets after
  completion of the master, but this suffers from the lack of recovery
  of a failed computation.

+ Stabilize logging.  The result logging system (at least the tracking
  and timestamp system) should be system-independent and backwards
  compatible, so I need to explicitly design a specification for
  creating the logs that ensures these two features.

+ CRITICAL: Upgraded my system to HDF5 1.10 and now HDF5 is
  complaining that files which I just opened are not file ids.  Will
  update with working HDF5 versions until bug fix is complete.

  Possibly add Gerd's HDF5 as a cl-ana dependency to fix.

+ It should be possible to build a pass-merge transformation defining
  system, so that makeres-cpp could be a very simple layer on top of
  the more general pass-merge transformation.  There are only a few
  differences between tabletrans and cpptrans which should allow for
  operator standardization, leaving only context management and final
  operators for configuration.

- Add utilities for merging pages and plots so that comparison plots
  can be made easily.

- Add grid settings to plot.  Includes adding grid function in same
  spirit as label, tics, etc.  Note that grid settings must be sent to
  gnuplot after tics settings.

- Resolve define-quantity-methods situation.  As it is now, it suffers
  from inefficiencies and a previously missed limitation: Methods(open-hdf-file (target-path '(cpp (local e1e d-n-pi+ san) deltat pip) "data")
:direction :input)
  which come with cl-ana cannot know about new quantity types, even if
  defquantity is used.  Either a smarter system is needed, or define a
  default arithmetic method which interprets everything as a quantity
  if necessary.

  Due to this, and due to the fact that the only commonly defined
  operations on quantities are basic arithmetic, it doesn't makes
  sense to favor extensible methods over a working solution.  At the
  same time, this also means that clobbering the default method is
  overkill since there is virtually no need to define new quantity
  types, whereas the user or other libraries may wish to override
  default settings.

  SOLUTION: Define default methods on arithmetic operators to
  interpret all arguments as quantities.  Define with-quantities macro
  to make defining these easier.

+ Possibly implement system for enabling or disabling the
  reader-macros for quantities and err-nums.

- Use #~ reader macro for err-nums instead of the (+- ...) system
  which doesn't allow reading and writing of literal objects.

+ Fully test new quantity implementation.  Quantities are not always
  expressed in base units, and instead #'quantity expands units when
  called on a quantity object.

+ Add plotting cleanup methods for implementations other than SBCL

  Added:
  * CLISP (needs testing but should work)

+ Fix potential bug in makeres-table as demonstrated in the large wiki
  example; apparently the (src y-cut x-y hist) target is still being
  treated as needing a second pass over (src y-cut) even when they are
  the only two targets with NIL stats.  Needs further investigation.

+ Add tutorial and example code to cl-ana which covers all the wiki
  material and other useful examples.

+ Fix draw-pdf so that periods, (.), in path basenames do not cause
  problems.  At the moment it looks like pdflatex can't infer the plot
  type if a period is in the path basename.

  WORKAROUND: Write to a temporary file and move to the final
  location.

- Find more efficient way of interacting with gnuplot.  The only
  reason cl-ana has to poll for output from gnuplot is because it
  loses output when unbuffered, but buffering could still be possible
  if real-time output could be read while maintaining buffered input.

  If gnuplot could work with files then a simple file-based system
  could be used to signal completion of commands.

  RESOLVED: Used the 'print' command to generate a prompt and
  prompt-wait for this on a per-plot basis.  There would likely be
  problems if an error caused the prompt command to not be evaluated,
  but since separate lines are sent to the gnuplot session this should
  not happen.

+ Small bug: Fix contiguous->sparse and sparse->contiguous so that the
  empty bin value and default increment can be copied or optionally
  set to new values.  At the moment they are not copied and left to
  the default values.

- FLAW: Current plotting solution file based solution grows
  uncontrolled every time a new Lisp instance running cl-ana draws a
  plot.  Need to find a better way to allow multiple cl-ana instances
  to share the same plotting directory without clobbering and with
  data files cleaned up automatically.  gnuplot seems to be the main
  problem here, since as it stands gnuplot seems to return a prompt
  prior to actually plotting the data, which means that cl-ana has no
  way to know when the plot has finished.

  POSSIBLE FIX: SBCL at least supports exit hooks through
  sb-ext:*exit-hooks*, so an implementation-dependent exit-hook system
  could allow cl-ana to cleanup after itself.  Quitting Lisp from
  SLIME seems to trigger the exit hook system in SBCL at least.

  SOLUTION: Added SBCL method for cleaning up

- BUG: Fix plotting so that multiple instances of lisp running cl-ana
  do not clobber each other's plot data files.

  Possible fix: Use process ID as unique identifier and place all plot
  data underneath a directory named after the PID.  Have draw delete
  the directory after returning.

+ Improve plotting so that safe IO is more efficient.  At the moment
  the per-line checking after generating all commands for a page is
  much slower than I'd like it to be.  Perhaps instead of per-line it
  could be per a certain number of lines?  Pages now control the file
  index so plots can theoretically have their commands sent without
  confirming receipt, but this caused problems with larger multiplots
  even using file IO.

- Found bug with gnuplot-file-io; my PhD code is currently an example
  of the bug.

  gnuplot-interface and plotting need to be modified so that the draw
  function can wait on gnuplot to return a prompt.

  Fixed using unbuffer from expect

- Need operator mvres which renames a target in the target table and
  moves its log as well.  Should take arguments from, to, and &key
  force-p which would force deletion of any conflicting files at the
  destination.

- Solved bug in cl-ana.makeres-table; group-ids-by-pass needed to
  remove targets prior to grouping into passes.

+ Need to add warning message in the case where an lfield is defined
  which causes circular dependencies.  Circular dependencies need
  detection and handling in general.

- Changing an lfield definition currently does not effect any targets
  in the target-table directly, and therefore propogation does not
  automatically recompute affected targets.  The transdeps system is
  in place, so maybe it could be used in conjunction with small
  modifications to deflfields in order to allow recomputation in the
  case of lfield changes.

- makeres should support resuming computations if an error causes
  computation to cease.  This could be supported via load-project in
  conjunction with files generated by makeres.  If makeres creates a
  log file at the start of a computation and deletes this file at the
  end of computation, then the presence of this file would indicate
  that a problem had occurred during the last computation.
  load-project could then throw an exception and ask what to do, the
  primary option being to determine from the logged information which
  targets had been successfully computed and which had not been.  If
  the log contains the names of the targets being computed and the
  computation start time, then any logged results with computation
  times not being at least as recent as the logged computation need to
  be recomputed.  The dependencies should not be unset since in
  general makeres does not and should not demand propogation, allowing
  for dependencies to be conceivable computed in any order due to user
  intervention.

- Possibly define added dependency function for macrotrans as done for
  tabletrans since macros should be expanded to check for
  dependencies.

- Dependencies propogated through lfields are not handled properly.
  If a table reduction makes use of an lfield which depends on a
  result target, then updating the target does not propogate through
  the reductions using those lfields.

+ Using err-nums in CSV tables is broken since err-nums are not
  actually readable as written.  Either need to go back to the
  reader-macro #e or find a way to make +- readable.

- Found bug in makeres-table: Reproducible in my private 6barana code,
  trying to find a minimal example for public.  When running project
  from scratch, no problems, but when loading a saved project and
  re-running, dep< when called on the final target table finds a loop
  in the graph.  It seems to be coming from a bug in table pass
  merging, as I checked the circular dependency in the final graph
  visually via dot-compile and dot->png.

  Resolved via patching removed-*-dep< functions in
  cl-ana.makeres-table

+ Possibly find iterative approach to transformations.  It would be
  very useful to allow computation of results before applying
  transformations so that computed results could change the way the
  target table is interpreted.  Not sure how practical this is or
  whether it would be efficient in practice, but this could allow for
  very interesting computations.  E.g. the branching transformation
  could branch on calculated results as opposed to compile-time data.

- Fix err-num save-object

  Bug caused confusing behavior due to only being present in a large
  project I was working on.  Turns out that the new save-object and
  load-object methods for lists were writing err-nums to file in a way
  that they would not be read correctly since there was no special
  method for saving err-nums.  Added a save-object method for err-nums
  to fix.

- CRITICAL BUG: read-histogram is broken.

  * read-histogram cannot read histograms saved via write-histogram,
    while old-read-histogram still can.

+ Add some method to check if an object can be printed so that
  save-object can more efficiently handle output to file for
  e.g. sequences.  Partially implemented in cons example, but this
  strategy does not scale well when adding many types.

- branchtrans appears broken; no matter what the target-stat is, each
  branch target keeps getting recomputed.

  Needed to treat already computed branch targets differently

+ Possibly change makeres-branch so that the branch source is actually
  the list form providing the branching.  At the moment, the algorithm
  assumes that there will be a single target which branches on a list
  of possibilities, and that this target must be referred to somewhere
  along a chain of branching sources.  However, what would be better
  would be to have parallel branches be able to access each other's
  targets during the branching, so this would require that the source
  be allowed to be the branch list form itself, or at least have this
  behavior emulated.

+ Provide some mechanism for treating makeres target-table
  transformations as plugins so that initialization and possibly even
  transformation ordering in the pipeline can be automated so users
  don't have to manage minutia.

- Potentially useful makeres transformation: Operators which allow
  branching.  Example: Creating histograms with different binnings.
  The branching operator could allow specification of a list of
  different branch values and an operator which would refer to the
  particular branch value in a branch instance, but the code would
  remain the same otherwise.  The branch operator would return a hash
  table mapping from the branch value to the corresponding computed
  result.  The branch transformation could create a result target for
  each branch so that e.g. table transformations would still work
  properly.  There could be a function #'branch (potentially private
  to the transformation package) which would take an id symbol and
  return the branch value for that particular branch instance.  That,
  or have a system of hash-tables.

- Bug in in-project: Calling in-project repeatedly on the same project
  id actually erases the target definitions.

  Fixed by creating function in-project-fn

+ makeres-table may have more problems.

  * On one occasion, after a computation failed, the source table was
    not logged although some of the reductions were logged.  This led
    to circular dependencies and compres would exhaust the stack.  The
    solution was to call setresfn on the source table ID using any
    table and then call save-target.  Once all the source tables were
    logged, the dependencies worked correctly and computation
    continued.

  * Also, when working on my phd analysis, after a computation fails
    and I correct the bug, some reductions which presumably should
    have been calculated already need recomputing.  This and the above
    potential bug may have the same source, I suspect some issues with
    the order of calls to setresfn, or maybe in setresfn itself.

+ Update documentation on tables due to changing the functionality of
  table field names

- Extend tables so that field names are general keyword symbols

  - hdf-tables and csv-tables are working with general keyword symbols
    as well as serialization of histograms.

  - ntuple-table and plist-table may need modification still

+ Allow any HDF5 compound type to be used with hdf-tables, not just
  those which are created from structures.  The field offsets are
  dependent on the compiler for structures, but the HDF5 files contain
  the offset information, so in principle any HDF5 type could be
  supported.  This would require a complete rennovation of the
  hdf-typespec utility, or perhaps a complete abandonment in favor of
  custom code just for hdf-tables.

* See makeres/ToDo.txt for makeres specific tasks

- Renovate logres so that results can be loaded/saved dynamically.

  There are two broad approaches:

  1. Find a naming/organization scheme on disk which is static;
     i.e. each target is algorithmically given a name which is unique
     to that target ID form, and each target handles its own contents
     by storing itself as either a directory or a file.

  2. Keep flat storage strategy, but implement condensing algorithm
     which renames the files such that the minimum maximum value is
     used; at the moment, naively keeping flat storage would result in
     ever growing index numbers due to old targets being removed while
     new targets keep acquiring larger index values.

  I'm leaning towards 1 due to being conceptually easier to work with
  and not all that difficult to implement.  The downside to 1 is that
  old result logs will either need to be converted or recomputed.

  Went with 1, used the target id as the pathname relative to the
  version path.

+ Fix read-histogram so that output from C/C++ code which does not use
  structs can still be used.

  At the moment, structs are used and the offets from a C struct
  placed in the HDF5 type since type conversion for compound types is
  built on top of CFFI's defcstruct.

  The only other options would be to include offset information in a
  compound typespec and then update the HDF5 -> typespec functions as
  well as any which process typespecs.

% Create raw-hdf-table and raw-hdf-table-chain which remove the
  automatic type conversion from HDF5 types to Lisp, and require the
  user to use foreign object interfaces from e.g. CFFI to analyze
  data.  This seems to be necessary for large datasets since, as per
  the results from the benchmarks below, ROOT with C++ is 2 orders of
  magnitude faster than the current Lisp implementation.

  NOTE: The raw versions are pending for deletion due to new benchmark
  results; type conversion isn't the bottleneck.

- Conduct detailed benchmarks of Lisp performance vs. C++ with ROOT or
  HDF5 for processing datasets of varying size and structure, varying
  number of histograms to fill, etc., both for makeres generated code
  and for fully optimized Lisp.

  Tentative results: that ROOT with C++ runs 2 orders of magnitude
  faster than either the macro or compiled benchmarks in Lisp which
  use the low level libraries, and type declaration doesn't appear to
  aid much at all.

  Final results: C++ with ROOT is two orders of magnitude faster than
  cl-ana functionality (additional type declarations don't have any
  effect), but less than a factor of 2 away from raw HDF5 CFFI
  function calls from within Lisp.  cl-ana histograms are a
  significant bottleneck even with type declarations.  C++ with HDF5
  and naive histograms is even faster than ROOT.

- work-path function which returns paths relative to the current
  working directory, ensure-directories-exist being called to define
  subdirectories automatically

- Single function/macro for defining a makeres+logres project along
  with common settings.

+ Update copyright to be 2013-2015

logres:

- If logged target form is not equal to the one loaded into the Lisp
  image, then propogate the need to compute any targets which depend
  on that target.  At the moment, I think I'm just not loading the
  target, but in principle if you change the form (and value) of a
  target but load targets which actually depend on it, then you'll
  load the wrong values which actually need recomputing as well.

- Log target form so that current form can be checked against the one
  used to compute the result logged.  This removes the need for the
  user to keep track of which targets have been updated if the results
  were not saved or if multiple analysis versions are being used.
  Updates to libraries will still be problematic however.

- Each target and logged file should come with a timestamp so that
  versions of targets and files can be compared.  This would be useful
  for e.g. sending files to another computer and only updating the
  files which have differing timestamps as well as only saving targets
  which have changed when saving a project.

+ Use SHA1 sums for checking work files

  This is partially completed, but I need to find a way to easily
  track sha1 sums for files.  At the moment, it's turning into a
  monolithic monster whereas I would rather have operators provided
  which automate the management of the sha1 sums.

+ Logging functionality may need to be partially supported by graph
  transformations so that targets can be saved to disk and cleared
  from memory to avoid memory bottlenecks on low-memory systems.  It's
  already taking ~ 1.5 GB for my PhD analysis just to store all the
  histograms etc. in memory.

makeres:

- Add tabletrans operator which allows multiple targets to be defined
  and computed as a block.  Would greatly assist in allowing
  e.g. multiple maps over the same computed list, fitting data (since
  functions themselves cannot be logged but the parameters can,
  requiring multiple targets per fit).

  Could have a macro defresblock defining a result block.  Would take
  the ids of the computed results as arguments and would define
  temporary versions of the targets.  The tabletrans transformations
  would take care of providing e.g. the ability to refer specifically
  to which target you want to incrementally compute throughout the
  block.

  (COULD STILL DO THIS) This could actually provide a better platform
  for implementing the table transformations as well, as the merging
  of table passes ultimately computes multiple targets at once,
  meaning that at least some of the work currently done by
  makeres-table could be moved to this new tabletrans library.

+ Logging functionality may best be provided in the compiled function
  of compres.  Each target would have as its path its res id.  Each
  target would get its own directory, and inside a target's directory
  would be a timestamp file as well as the saved information from the
  target.  Each kind of target could have its own methods for storage,
  be it a single binary file or multiple files along with an index
  file.  Deleting a result could then automatically delete the stored
  result as well if desired.

* Some way to control when and how transformations are loaded into the
  pipeline that doesn't require the user to know the exact ordering
  required.  As it stands, you have to know that e.g. macro
  transformations are required for table transformations, and that the
  transformed macros should be expanded prior to table
  transformations.

makeres-macro:

- Add ability to define functions and still have dependencies tracked.
  This should be done simply by defining a new function definition
  operator, define-res-function, which will store its dependencies in
  a table.  Then, the makeres-macro tabletrans function will use this
  information as it code walks, looking for any calls to a
  res-function in a body and adding dependencies to the affected
  targets accordingly.

  SOLUTION: Defined new operator, define-res-function, which is just a
  special kind of res-macro which expands the body in such a way that
  the arguments are only evaluated once.

makeres-table:

- Source table definition with bootstrapping.  At the moment, the user
  is tasked with opening source tables and handling the situation when
  the source material for a table is not present.  There should be an
  operator, perhaps stab, which allows the definition of a source
  table.
